1. Introduction
For the past 15 years, Kaggle has been a meeting place for people from the Data and AI fields, creating a well-known environment for learning, publishing projects, and new challenges in these areas. Well, a meeting place... but how often have users actually cooperated over the last 15 years? [1]
Today, we will dive into the world of cooperation when it comes to data and answer a simple and specific, but important question - is it worth Kaggling alone or with someone else? By "Kaggling" we mean any activity of registered users on this portal (in particular, participating in competitions, creating databases, creating notebooks, or participating in discussions), but our main focus is competitions (without "InClass" category). This is due to the fact that creating notebooks or publishing datasets by more than one user is extremely rare, so much so that we do not have registered metadata on this subject, unlike competitions in which teams often reach the top of the tables and at the same time they are the most famous activity on Kaggle.
The analysis can be complicated at times, and the statements related to the number of teams are a bit boring, so...let's call Kaggle users superheroes - after all, the things they do with data are often amazing. We divide data superheroes into 3 types based on superheroes commonly known in pop culture:
Be like Superman a loner type, a person who acts alone. Superman is the one who enjoys all the effects of his work, but need to deal with problems on his own. As a Superman, we mean people who work on Kaggle alone - they take part in competitions themselves, create a one-man team (or maybe even a one-man army)
Be like Batman and Robin a pair of superheroes who fight together for one common goal. Even though Batman surpasses Robin, who is his helper, they form a small team together and their cooperation is crucial to success. By Batman and Robin, we mean people who work on Kaggle in team of 2, taking part in competitions together
Be like Avengers a team of many people working together to achieve a common goal. They aren't the same at all, but maybe this differentiation is their strength? As avengers, we consider Kaggle users working in larger teams than a pair (minimum 3 people), taking part in competitions
We can look for advantages and disadvantages of each option, but as data miners, we will look at the data and what information it carry. Are you ready for a journey through the world of data superheroes? Get in the superhero vehicle and fasten your seat belts!
unfold_moreShow hidden cell
For this exploratory analysis, we'll use R along with additional packages. The technology may not be the newest and is becoming increasingly extinct, but like superheroes, we do not focus on fashion but on efficiency, and for data storytelling and visualization, it is still a great solution.
The most important of them will be packages collected in the "tidyverse" package (dyplr, ggplot..), which allow for easy manipulation, preparation, analysis and visualization of data. In addition, loaded additional packages to create better charts such as RColorBrewer, ggthemes or ggrepel [2][3]. For the charts we will use a combination of two backgrounds - "fivethirtyeight" and our own with changes primarily to the size of fonts and elements on the chart (legends etc.). [4]
For technical people, the code will be continuously explained with comments in English - just click "Show hidden code" to see the full text with explanation.
unfold_moreShow hidden code
For the analysis, we use the great dataset prepared by Kaggle Team, containing a number of detailed information about user activities throughout 15 years of activity (competitions, discussions, notebooks and databases) stored in many tables. We are interested in 4 tables: TeamMemberships, Teams, Submission and Competitions [5]. So let's check whether it is better to be Superman or Batman and Robin or maybe Avengers: who has a better chance of success on Kaggle, which heroes achieve greater successes and medals on average? Let's shift into a higher gear and get to the point.
unfold_moreShow hidden code
We start our adventure with superheroes by counting them. The unit we use is a team per competition, which means that we can count teams multiple times if they took part in more than one competition (e.g. if someone took part solo in 10 competitions, we will count 10 points towards the total of Supermen). You don't have to have Superman's eyesight to see the overwhelming advantage of single-person teams over pairs and teams of 3+. There are almost 8 million participants as Supermen, while Batman with Robin and the Avengers had about 75,000 each. Avengers consist of 3 to 40 people, but most often it is a number between 3 and 5, because these are often the rules of competitions. It is worth noting that these are entries to competitions that do not require any submission. However, it will turn out that the result of Supermen still exceeds 90% even if we only take into account teams with at least one entry.
The participation of Supermen is quite overwhelming, so it is worth thinking a little longer - why is it so huge? We can make some assumptions, many people start the adventure alone and want to learn as much as possible by leading the project from start to finish. Many people would like to take part in a team but they did not manage to gather one, some took part in the competition but due to lack of time and motivation they abandoned it and did not look for a team, having large language models we may prefer consultations with a virtual assistant instead of another human being... we could go on and on creating countless scenarios. However, instead of blindly inventing, let's see in the paper what makes people facing similar challenges so often prefer to work alone.
There are quite a lot of articles on the broad topic of cooperation preferences and individual work, but let's limit ourselves to a few. Since the 90s, the term "Social Loafing" has been used, proving that working in a group translates into less effort put into the project compared to individual work [6]. Kagglers may prefer to work alone, because taking part in the competition requires a lot of intellectual effort, which they are much better able to do when working alone.
Working in a group also translates into a much larger number of all kinds of distractions, things that divert attention from hard work. This phenomenon has been studied in software development, so in a very similar field to Kaggle competitions, after all, both here and there you work with programming code [7]. Also last year, a study was released confirming that all kinds of breaks have a clear negative impact on software development [8], and such breaks are much more frequent when working in groups.
It is also worth not forgetting about behavioral issues - we can find information in the research articles about the self-determination theory, according to which a person needs a certain kind of autonomy and competition. The choice of individual participation in the competition can be driven by such needs that, on the one hand, allow for full control of one's own actions and decisions (which is impossible in the case of cooperation in a group) and also allows for satisfying the need for competence, wanting to prove one's independent skills [9].
The question now arises - is Kaggle unique in this proportion?, or are similar competitions in which there is, in principle, freedom in choosing the size of the team also characterized by a large dominance of single-person teams? Unfortunately, it is hard to find a good example of a similar platform with similar rules that registers its data. However, we can compare our data to another very popular activity related to Data Science / AI in which there is complete freedom as to independence and work in a group - writing research articles.
We managed to find a collection that publishes metadata about articles only in the field of AI. It contains a sample of exactly 10,000 such articles, linked from 1993 to 2023 [10]. All of them were published on one of the most popular websites on this subject, i.e. arxiv, a free distribution service and an open-access archive for nearly 2.4 million scholarly articles in many fields including computer science [11].
Despite the visible differences between both activities (but also common elements), let's check if the distribution of groups is similar.
unfold_moreShow hidden code
unfold_moreShow hidden code
From the papers database, we extract the number of authors and reduce them to the same categories as our supermen: 1, 2 and 3+ people in a team. On Kaggle, if we take only teams that published at least 1 solution to the competition, we see that 93% are supermen (less than when counting situations with no submissions, but still an overwhelming majority), while pairs and larger teams constitute 4% and 3% respectively. The sample from 15 years and all competitions covered slightly over 1.2 million teams.
In AI papers, we have a smaller sample and a wider time range, but the differences are clearly visible: Supermen published only every fifth scientific article (21%). Batman and Robin contributed about 2,800 articles out of 10,000, while over half, or as much as 51%, are Avengers.So the difference is huge, when publishing articles people form teams much more often than when participating in competitions on Kaggle (despite similar topics around AI). However, it is worth taking into account the different data period and sample size. Let's also remember that the activity of writing scientific articles has a different character: it is not limited by time, number of submissions or strict form. However, we can be sure that it is not the topic of AI itself that makes people work alone - writing articles brings people together to cooperate, so it seems that the form of competition itself has a much greater impact on the dominance of one-man army.
2. Analysis in time
Now that we know that Supermen dominates, let's look at these groups over time. Has the dominance of Supermen really been so significant since forever? And can we indicate that this will continue to be the case in the near future? Let's start with the annual overshoot for the last 15 years (or really 16, because even though Kaggle is 15 years old, its calendar covers parts of 2010 and 2025).
unfold_moreShow hidden code
As you can see, the differences between years are not large, and each time the people taking part in the competition themselves has over 90% of all teams each year. The record year in terms of teams with at least 2 users was 2012, when such teams constituted about 9% of the entire population. The fluctuations are so small that it is difficult to find trends in relation to non-solo teams. However, it can be noticed that compared to the first years of Kaggle's operation, the Avengers are gaining in importance at the expense of Batman and Robin. In the past, the advantage of pairs was significant among 2+ teams (2010-2015), but in recent years there has been a slight surplus of 3+ teams over pairs (2023-2024). Remember that 2025 is still here and the mid-year sample should be treated with caution.
We already know the historical values and know about the low variability, but the perspective of looking into the future is so interesting that we will try to make a forecast of what the distribution of superheroes may look like in the next five years.
We will use simple modeling for this - our Y is the percentage share of a specific group at a specific moment in time (values for the full year 2026, 2027..) and the explanatory feature (X) is the year of observation. So we are creating 3 models: for Supermen, Batman & Robin's, and for Avengers separately.
We decide to use the polynominal regression method [12] presented by the formula.
𝑦=
𝛽
0
+
𝛽
1
𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟+
𝛽
2
𝑌𝑒𝑎
𝑟
2
+𝜀
2
By using this method we achieve a compromise between the simplicity of the model (we only have one feature and few observations, so we choose something not too advanced so as not to overfit the model but to detect a general relationship) and its predictive abilities (the trends according to the graph above seem to be non-linear, so the method of raising the explanatory feature to a power will help to solve this problem).
unfold_moreShow hidden code
The charts use a log scale because the lines for Batman & Robin and the Avengers overlap significantly, reducing readability. The results of all three models are quite clear: the models predict a small increase in the share of Supermen (it's hard to see a huge increase, because the values are sometimes close to 100%) and a decrease among the other groups. At the moment, groups of two and 3+ people are more or less at the same level, but a faster decrease is predicted among pairs. So in a few years, will 2 and 3+ groups be even more "exotic" than they are today? Models are just predictions, so we have to wait until empirical data appears.
3. Competition participation
We already know how the participation in the group was shaped over time. Now let's get into the issue of participation in competitions related to the names of the most popular competitions in which all three groups took part, the number of entries to the competitions and the medals won (in general and over the years).
unfold_moreShow hidden code
First, let's take a look at the most popular official competitions (excluding "inClass" competitions). We will do this in four configurations: all teams at once and each group separately. Looking at all of them, the clear leader is "Santander Consumer Transaction Prediction". This is the only competition in which almost 9,000 teams took part, it took place in 2019 and concerned "identify which customers will make a specific transaction in the future irrespective of the amount of money transacted" [13]. We have a total of 10 competitions in which the number of teams with at least 1 successful submission was over 4,500. Knowing the information from the previous charts, it is not surprising to us that in each of these competitions supermen dominated. The competition from the top in which the percentage was the smallest is "M5 - Forecasting - Accuracy" from 2020, in which participants had to predict daily sales at Walmart based on historical sales data [14].
Among the Supermen, the most popular competition is also undoubtedly Santander Consumer Transaction Prediction. It was a relatively simple competition with tabular data and a high prize pool, which allowed it to attract over 8,000 one-person teams and is a big leader. So far, 13 competitions have been held, in which over 4,000 Supermen took part. The ranking list is very similar to the general list (which is not surprising, as the general list is made up of over 90% of the Supermen).
Since we know where the Supermen were most often, we track down the Batmans and Robins. It turns out that where the Supermen were, the competitions organized by Santander were most often attended by two-person teams. Second place is also the same as in the case of the Supermen, the "Home Credit Default Risk" competition. The differences in the ranking compared to the Supermen are already visible in the subsequent positions. The "Porto Seguro's Safe Driver Prediction" competition was relatively unpopular among pairs. So far, only 12 competitions have gathered more than 250 Batman & Robin taking part in a joint event (and only 4 of them more than 300).
At the end of a short adventure with the most popular competitions, we check where the Avengers traveled most often, groups of at least 3 data superheroes. We see a change in the leadership position in relation to the previous groups - the largest number of groups of several or a dozen people took part in the "Home Credit Default Risk" competition, predicting whether a loan will be repaid (binary classification problem) [15]. The "Woman in Data Science" community competitions have also become popular among groups - among the 7 most popular Avengers competitions, as many as 3 are editions of this challenge from 2021-2023 [16]. So far, over 250 groups of at least 3 people have taken part in 13 competitions - similarly to the case of pairs.
Now let's take a closer look at the distribution of submissions between superhero groups.
unfold_moreShow hidden code
The competition entries themselves are not individual, you can almost always publish more than one model in one competition. These issues are regulated in the competition rules, most often through daily submission limits. The distribution of the number of submissions is visualized using boxplots (separate for each group) and on the vertical axis we use a logarithmic scale to improve readability and better show differences.
At first glance, there is an obvious relationship - the larger the team, the greater the number of submissions. Among Supermen, the median number of entries for the competition is single-digit, and the average is 12. Situations in which a single-person team submits several hundred submissions are rare. For pairs, the average number of models is more than twice as many as in the previous group (26), and for larger groups it is 44. Of course, the number of submissions can naturally be higher if we have more people in the team, because this produces more ideas for a new model/solution. However, it is worth noting that when we divide the number of submissions by the number of people in the team, it is still slightly higher in large teams. Could it be that group work motivates members to make further attempts? Or maybe participation in groups is often taken much more seriously than individual attempts?
Let's get to the submissions that turned out to be the most effective and were awarded medals.
unfold_moreShow hidden code
We check how the medals won are distributed depending on the groups, creating 4 stacked bars (for gold, silver, bronze and no medals). The relationship is very visible - the higher the medal rank, the greater the share of teams consisting of at least 2 people, and the lower the medal rank, the greater the share of single-person teams. 25% of gold medals are won by teams consisting of at least 3 people, while their number among all teams is only about 1% (20 times more effective than Supermen). A similar sentence is true for pairs, which are slightly less effective in winning medals than teams, but do much better than individuals. Batman & Robin and the Avengers, despite being a group of only a few percentage points, win almost 40% of gold medals and almost 30% of all medals. So do you want to increase your chances of winning a medal? Work in a group, the data here is absolutely clear.
The question is whether it has always been like this since the beginning of the competitions? And whether in the future we will also have a relatively huge success of groups over individuals? Let's see...
unfold_moreShow hidden code
Let's focus on the gold medals only for now - they are the goals of the competition and often come with valuable prizes. We create a bar chart representing the share of gold medals in the groups, with a separate bar showing the values for each year, starting from 2010.
It turns out that the differences between years are quite large, especially when we compare the participation of groups after years were characterized by low variability. Winnings by pairs and teams started from a fairly low level in 2010 and then systematically increased (with smaller fluctuations) until 2018, where they reached their peak. 2018 was the peak, it is the only period in which more than half of the winners were Avengers and Batman & Robin were less than 25%. Since then, we have seen a decline and stabilization at a more or less equal level in the last 6 years.
We know what it was like based on empirical data. And what about based on forecasts?
unfold_moreShow hidden code
Similarly to point 2, we use polynomial regression for the same reasons as mentioned in the previous chapter and make predictions for 5 years ahead. According to the model, in the coming years the share of Superman among gold medalists should grow significantly each year, so that in 2030 it will reach a value above 75% and approach the record, which belongs to the first year on Kaggle. A slow decrease is predicted among Batmans and Robins, and a rapid decrease among Avengers, and within a few years the group will give place to pairs. It is worth approaching this forecast with great caution due to the simplicity of the model and relatively short history.
Gold medals are a fairly narrow group, though the most prestigious but also the smallest, resulting in a smaller data sample. So let's take a closer look at the populations - the groups that won the medal (regardless of color, equating gold, silver and bronze medalists).
unfold_moreShow hidden code
As in the case of gold medals, the record year for Supermen was the first in the measurements 2010, after which there is an increase in the share of groups of 2+ people. This increase, however, is not as dynamic as in the case of gold models (much flatter), the biggest difference occurred between 2017 and 2018. Over the last 7 years, we have seen stabilization of all 3 groups at levels more or less: 55% of medals for Supermen, 15% of medals for Batman and Robin, and 30% of medals for Avengers.
And what does the future hold in terms of the overall distribution of medals in groups?
unfold_moreShow hidden code
This time, the forecasts suggest quite calm and slow changes in the ratio of forecasts concerning only gold medals. A very slow increase in the share of Supermen is forecasted (by about 1 percentage point per year), so a return to the level above 70% should not happen soon. A similar increase is forecasted for Avengers. A slow decline is probable for Batman & Robin by about 1.5-2 percentage points per year, according to the model.
We know more about the superhero submissions and medals, but the competitions differ in the type of challenges, the methods of assessments, and the number and quality of prizes, which we'll look at in Chapter 4.
4. Competition metadata
First, let's look at the most general and popular division of competitions, which is their type.
unfold_moreShow hidden code
Kaggle competitions are divided into types defined by the organizers (regardless of whether they are official competitions with medals or communities). The group of competitions in which teams consisting of 2 or more people make the largest percentage in relation to the rest (at least 10% of all teams) are the Analytics and Research competitions. Analytics every sixth team is not Superman and it is worth noting the particularly high percentage of Batman & Robin in this category compared to the rest. The category in which single-person teams dominate the most is recruitment competitions, because they are usually created to verify the skills of one candidate, so the participation of more than one person is extremely rare.
Next, let's look at the metrics by which submissions are assessed. There are many metrics used in competitions, so we will limit ourselves to only the 10 most popular ones (we measure popularity by the number of submissions to competitions with a specific metric and sort the chart from the most popular ones).
unfold_moreShow hidden code
There is no significant difference in the distributions between the metrics. The largest share of non-solo teams is observed where the metric is MAP@{K}, or Mean Average Precision [17]. A certain tendency can be observed - in the most obvious and easy-to-understand metrics, especially those related to classifications (such as Accuracy or MulticlassLoss), there is a greater concentration of Supermen, while slightly less obvious metrics (such as MAP or QuadricWightedKappa) have a relatively large share of larger groups. Could it be that if a competition has a difficult metric, users are eager to support each other in teams to overcome a more difficult challenge?
Let's move on to what many people like the most about competitions - prizes for the best place/places. For simplicity, the prizes are divided into 5 categories: Cash, Prizes, Kudos/Swag, Knowaldge and Jobs.
unfold_moreShow hidden code
Let's look at the distribution of participants depending on the prizes for taking the top places in the competition. The largest share of teams consisting of two or more people is when the prize is "cash". Naturally, when money comes into play, increasing the team can bring us closer to this goal, but the value of 9% is not spectacular. A characteristic category is "Jobs", in which only 1-person teams take part - no wonder, recruitment takes place separately, and the candidate is verified individually, which means that participation in teams from the beginning is usually prohibited.
And finally, the number of awards, regardless of the category or the number of participants or the number of medals.
unfold_moreShow hidden code
More prizes mean more chances to win, so it can be activating. The chart shows a clear relationship - the more prizes, the greater the number of Batmans with Robins and Avengers in relation to Supermen (only 3 prizes slightly disturb the more clearly outlined trend). These two groups in competitions with one prize make up less than 5% of participants, while in competitions with more than 5 prizes they make up over 10%.
That's all about the types of contests and prizes... phew, the world of heroes can be complicated, so let's put it all together in a more compact form.
5. Conclusions
Our aim was to investigate how three types of teams evolved over the 15-year history of Kaggle competitions: one-person teams (which we called "Supermen"), two-person teams ("Batman and Robin"), and three-or-more-person teams ("Avengers"). We analyzed this phenomenon based on various factors. Here are the key conclusions from our analysis:
The Supermen (people participating in competitions on their own) are definitely the dominant group in the world of data superheroes
It is difficult to point out a clear reason for such dominance, the papers suggests it may be the effect of "social loafing", a smaller number of distractions and the need for autonomy and greater control over the project
Supermen dominance does not occur in another AI-related activity - paper writing, among which Superman is the rarest group and Avengers the most popular
Supermen dominance is visible in all years since the beginning, the differences between years are small
It is predicted that in the coming years, Supermen dominance may continue to deepen at the expense of other groups at a slow pace
"Santander Consumer Transaction Prediction" was the most popular competition among single and double groups, but "Home Credit - Credit Risk Model Stability" gathered the largest number of groups with 3+ members
The number of submissions is higher the larger the team is
Among the medals, especially gold ones, the share of Batman & Robin and Avengers is definitely (!) higher than in the entire population
The share of medals (both gold and non-gold) won by larger teams increased steadily until 2018, after which there was a stabilization
Stabilization in the distribution of medals between groups is expected in the coming years, but a sharp increase in the percentage of gold medals won by one-man armies is likely
"Analytics" competitions attracted the most teams of 2+ people, while recruitment competitions are popular only among Supermen
Classification model competitions with simple metrics are home to Supermen, while less obvious metrics have an above-average share of larger teams
Cash and a large number of prizes encourage participants to start together, while recruitment and small prizes are particularly favored by 1-person teams
What is the main conclusion for people who work on Kaggle on a daily basis? Don't be fooled into thinking that team building is a sideshow on Kaggle. It's true that teams are rare (even rarer than you might think), but they win prizes and medals disproportionately to their population, so is it worth it to start a team for the next competition and compete with others? You can look for team partners on competition forums, the official Discord or through less official channels such as co-workers or college friends.
And remember, even though we are different, we make up a great community of data superheroes. We don't fight against anyone, but like superheroes we try to solve the problems that are chaos in the data from which we want to "save" valuable information. It doesn't matter whether you start as Superman, Batman & Robin or the Avengers - the most important thing is fair competition, expanding your knowledge and having fun! 😎
Special thanks to all commentators for important feedback on the project, especially Tensor Girl!
Some code comments and single lines of code were created using Generative Artificial Intelligence (Gemini Flash 2.5). All descriptions and most of the code were created by [myself](https://www.kaggle.com/michau96).
References
https://www.kaggle.com/docs
https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/index.html
https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/
https://www.kaggle.com/code/michau96/15-factors-for-data-science-in-your-country
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/kaggle/meta-kaggle
Karau, Steven & Williams, Kipling. (1993). Social Loafing: A Meta-Analytic Review and Theoretical Integration. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Brumby, Duncan & Janssen, Christian & Mark, Gloria. (2019). How Do Interruptions Affect Productivity?
Ma, Yimeng & Huang, Yu & Leach, Kevin. (2024). Breaking the Flow: A Study of Interruptions During Software Engineering Activities.
Richard M. Ryan and Edward L. Deci. (2000). Self-Determination Theory and the Facilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and Well-Being.
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/yasirabdaali/arxivorg-ai-research-papers-dataset
https://arxiv.org/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polynomial_regression
https://www.kaggle.com/c/santander-customer-transaction-prediction/overview
https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/m5-forecasting-accuracy
https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/home-credit-default-risk
https://www.widsworldwide.org/
https://sdsawtelle.github.io/blog/output/mean-average-precision-MAP-for-recommender-systems.html
Inspiration for creating data storytelling
Knaflic, Cole Nussbaumer. (2015). Storytelling with Data: A Data Visualization Guide for Business Professionals.
Biecek, Przemysław. (2014). Odkrywać! Ujawniać! Objaśniać! Zbiór esejów o sztuce prezentowania danych.